<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick consulted a page of his notes. For a moment he looked a little distressed. “Sir Charles,” he began. “Er⁠—Sir Charles⁠ ⁠…” It was plain that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick was finding difficulty in discovering any point at all on which Sir Charles had been right, and he was a kindly man. He brightened. “Oh, yes, of course. Sir Charles was the first to point out the important fact that there had been an erasure on the piece of notepaper used for the forged letter. That was⁠—er⁠—very helpful.</p>
			<p>“Then he was right too when he put forward the suggestion that Sir Eustace’s impending divorce was really the mainspring of the whole tragedy. Though I am afraid,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick felt compelled to add, “that the inference he drew was not the correct one. He was quite right too in feeling that the criminal, in such a clever plot, would take steps to arrange an alibi, and that there was, in fact, an alibi in the case that would have to be circumvented. But then again it was not Lady Pennefather’s.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, “was quite right to insist that the murder was the work of somebody with a knowledge of criminology. That was a very clever inference, and I am glad,” beamed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, “to be able to assure her that it was perfectly correct. She contributed another important piece of information too, just as vital to the real story underlying this tragedy as to her own case, namely that Sir Eustace was not in love with Miss Wildman at all but was hoping to marry her simply for her money. Had that not been the case,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, shaking his head, “I fear, I very much fear, that it would have been Miss Wildman who met her death instead of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix.”</p>
			<p>“Good God!” muttered Sir Charles; and it is perhaps as great a tribute as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick was ever to receive that the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism z3998:name-title">K.C.</abbr> accepted this startling news without question.</p>
			<p>“That clinches it,” muttered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming. “Discarded mistress.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick turned to him. “As for you, Bradley, it’s astonishing how near you came to the truth. Amazing!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick registered amazement. “Even in your first case, against yourself, so many of your conclusions were perfectly right. The final result of your deductions from the nitrobenzene, for instance; the fact that the criminal must be neat-fingered and of a methodical and creative mind; even, what appeared to me at the time just a trifle farfetched, that a copy of Taylor would be found on the criminal’s shelves.</p>
			<p>“Then beyond the fact that <abbr>No.</abbr> 4 must be qualified to ‘must have had an opportunity of secretly obtaining a sheet of Mason’s notepaper,’ all twelve of your conditions were quite right, with the exception of 6, which does not admit of an alibi, and 7 and 8, about the Onyx pen and Harfield’s ink. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham was right in that matter with his rather more subtle point of the criminal’s probable unobtrusive borrowing of the pen and ink. Which is exactly what happened, of course, with regard to the typewriter.</p>
			<p>“As for your second case⁠—well!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick seemed to be without words to express his admiration of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley’s second case. “You reached to the truth in almost every particular. You saw that it was a woman’s crime, you deduced the outraged feminine feelings underlying the whole affair, you staked your whole case on the criminal’s knowledge of criminology. It was really most penetrating.”</p>
			<p>“In fact,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley, carefully concealing his gratification, “I did everything possible except find the murderess.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that is so, of course,” deprecated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, somehow conveying the impression that after all finding the murderess was a very minor matter compared with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley’s powers of penetration.</p>
			<p>“And then we come to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t!” implored Roger. “Leave him out.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, but your reconstruction was very clever,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick assured him with great earnestness. “You put a new aspect on the whole affair, you know, by your suggestion that it was the right victim who was killed after all.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it seems that I erred in good company,” Roger said tritely, with a glance at Miss Dammers.</p>
			<p>“But you didn’t err,” corrected <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick.</p>
			<p>“Oh?” Roger showed his surprise. “Then it was all aimed against <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick looked confused. “Haven’t I told you about that? I’m afraid I’m doing this in a very muddleheaded way. Yes, it is partially true to say that the plot was aimed against <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix. But the real position, I think, is that it was aimed against <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix and Sir Eustace jointly. You came very near the truth, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham, except that you substituted a jealous husband for a jealous rival. Very near indeed. And of course you were entirely right in your point that the method was not suggested by the chance possession of the notepaper or anything like that, but by previous cases.”</p>
			<p>“I’m glad I was entirely right over something,” murmured Roger.</p>
			<p>“And Miss Dammers,” bowed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, “was most helpful. <em>Most</em> helpful.”</p>
			<p>“Although not convincing,” supplemented that lady drily.</p>
			<p>“Although I’m afraid I did not find her altogether convincing,” agreed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, with an apologetic air. “But it was really the theory she gave us that at last showed me the truth. For she also put yet another aspect on the crime, with her information regarding the⁠—h’m!⁠—the affair between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix and Sir Eustace. And that really,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, with another little bow to the informant, “was the foundation-stone of the whole business.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t see how it could fail to be,” said Miss Dammers. “But I still maintain that my deductions from it are the correct ones.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps if I may just put my own forward?” hesitated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, apparently somewhat dashed.</p>
			<p>Miss Dammers accorded a somewhat tart permission.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick collected himself. “Oh, yes; I should have said that Miss Dammers was quite right in one important particular, her assumption that it was not so much the affair between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix and Sir Eustace that was at the bottom of the crime, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix’s character. That really brought about her own death. Miss Dammers, I should imagine, was perfectly right in her tracing out of the intrigue, and her imaginative insight into <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix’s reactions⁠—I think that is the word?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick inquired diffidently of authority. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix’s reactions to it, but not, I consider, in her deductions regarding Sir Eustace’s growing boredom.</p>
			<p>“Sir Eustace, I am led to believe, was less inclined to be bored than to share the lady’s distress. For the real point, which happened to escape Miss Dammers, is that Sir Eustace was quite infatuated with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix. Far more so than she with him.</p>
			<p>“That,” pronounced <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, “is one of the determining factors in this tragedy.”</p>
			<p>Everybody pinned the factor down. The Circle’s attitude towards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick by this time was one of intelligent expectation. Probably no one really thought that he had found the right solution, and Miss Dammers’s stock had not been appreciably lowered. But certainly it seemed that the man had at any rate got something to offer.</p>
			<p>“Miss Dammers,” proceeded the object of their attention, “was right in another point she made too, namely that the inspiration of this murder, or perhaps I should say the method of it, certainly came from that book of poisoning cases she mentioned, of which her own copy (she tells us) is at present in Sir Eustace’s rooms⁠—planted there,” added <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, much shocked, “by the murderess.</p>
			<p>“And another useful fact she established. That <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix had been lured (really,” apologised <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, “I can use no other word) to the Rainbow Club that morning. But it was not <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix who telephoned to him on the previous afternoon. Nor was he sent there for the particular purpose of receiving the chocolates from Sir Eustace. The fact that the lunch appointment had been cancelled was altogether outside the criminal’s knowledge. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix was sent there to be a witness to Sir Eustace receiving the parcel; that was all.</p>
			<p>“The intention was, of course, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix should have Sir Eustace so connected in his mind with the chocolates that if suspicion should ever arise against any definite person, that of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix would be directed before long to Sir Eustace himself. For the fact of his wife’s intrigue would be bound to come to his knowledge, as indeed I understand privately that it has, causing him naturally the most intense distress.”</p>
			<p>“So that’s why he’s been looking haggard,” exclaimed Roger.</p>
			<p>“Without doubt,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick agreed gravely. “It was a wicked plot. Sir Eustace, you see, was expected to be dead by then and incapable of denying his guilt, and such evidence as there was had been carefully arranged to point to murder and suicide on his part. That the police never suspected him (that is, so far as we know), simply shows that investigations do not always take the turn that the criminal expects. And in this case,” observed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick with some severity, “I think the criminal was altogether too subtle.”</p>
			<p>“If that was her very involved reason for ensuring the presence of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix at the Rainbow Club,” agreed Miss Dammers with some irony, “her subtlety certainly overreached itself.” It was evident that not only on the point of psychology did Miss Dammers not find herself ready to accept <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick’s conclusions.</p>
			<p>“That, indeed, is exactly what happened,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick pointed out mildly. “Oh, and while we are on the subject of the chocolates, I ought to add that the reason why they were sent to Sir Eustace’s club was not only so that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix might be a witness of their arrival, but also, I should imagine, so that Sir Eustace would be sure to take them with him to his lunch-appointment. The murderess of course would be sufficiently conversant with his ways to know that he would almost certainly spend the morning at his club and go straight on to lunch from there; the odds were enormous that he would take the box of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix’s favourite chocolates with him.</p>
			<p>“I think we may regard it as an instance of the criminal’s habitual overlooking of some vital point that is to lead eventually to detection, that this murderess completely lost sight of the possibility that the appointment for lunch might be cancelled. She is a particularly ingenious criminal,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick with gentle admiration, “and yet even she is not immune from this failing.”</p>
			<p>“Who is she, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick?” ingenuously asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick answered her with a positively roguish smile. “Everybody else has withheld the name of the suspect till the right moment. Surely I may be allowed to do so too.</p>
			<p>“Well, I think I have cleared up most of the doubtful points now. Mason’s notepaper was used, I should say, because chocolates had been decided on as the vehicle and Mason’s were the only chocolate manufacturing firm who were customers of Webster’s. As it happened, this fitted very well, because it was always Mason’s chocolates that Sir Eustace bought for his⁠—er⁠—his friends.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming looked puzzled. “Because Mason’s were the only firm who were customers of Webster’s? I’m afraid I don’t understand.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I <em>am</em> explaining all this badly,” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick in much distress, assuming all blame for this obtuseness. “It had to be some firm on Webster’s books, you see, because Sir Eustace has his notepaper printed at Webster’s, and he was to be identified as having been in there recently if the purloined piece was ever connected with the sample book. Exactly, in fact, as Miss Dammers did.”</p>
			<p>Roger whistled. “Oh, I see. You mean, we’ve all been putting the cart before the horse over this piece of notepaper?”</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid so,” regretted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick with earnestness. “Really, I’m very much afraid so.”</p>
			<p>Insensibly opinion was beginning to turn in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick’s favour. To say the least, he was being just as convincing as Miss Dammers had been, and that without subtle psychological reconstructions and references to “values.” Only Miss Dammers herself remained outwardly sceptical; but that, after all, was only to be expected.</p>
			<p>“Humph!” said Miss Dammers, sceptically.</p>
			<p>“What about the motive, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick?” nodded Sir Charles with solemnity. “Jealousy, did you say? I don’t think you’ve quite cleared up that yet, have you?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, of course.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick actually blushed. “Dear me, I meant to make that clear right at the beginning. I <em>am</em> doing this badly. No, not jealousy, I’m inclined to fancy. Revenge. Or revenge at any rate so far as Sir Eustace was concerned, and jealousy as regards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix. From what I can understand, you see, this lady is⁠—dear me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, in distress and embarrassment, “this is very delicate ground. But I must trespass on it. Well⁠—though she had concealed it successfully from her friends, this lady had been very much in love with Sir Eustace, and become⁠—er⁠—had become,” concluded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick bravely, “his mistress. That was a long time ago.</p>
			<p>“Sir Eustace was very much in love with her too, and though he used to amuse himself with other women it was understood by both that this was quite permissible so long as there was nothing serious. The lady, I should say, is very modern and broad-minded. It was understood, I believe, that he was to marry her as soon as he could induce his wife (who was quite ignorant of this affair) to divorce him. But when this was at last arranged, Sir Eustace found that owing to his extreme financial stringency, it was imperative that he should marry money instead.</p>
			<p>“The lady was naturally very disappointed, but knowing that Sir Eustace did not care at all for⁠—er⁠—was not really in love with Miss Wildman and the marriage would only be, so far as he was concerned, one of convenience, she reconciled herself to the future and, quite seeing Sir Eustace’s necessity, did not resent the introduction of Miss Wildman⁠—whom indeed,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick felt himself compelled to add, “she considered as quite negligible. It never occurred to her to doubt, you see, that the old arrangement would hold good, and she would still have Sir Eustace’s real love with which to content herself.</p>
			<p>“But then something quite unforeseen happened. Sir Eustace not only fell out of love with her. He fell unmistakably in love with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix. Moreover, he succeeded in making her his mistress. That was quite recently, since he began to pay his addresses to Miss Wildman. And I think Miss Dammers has given us a true picture of the results in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix’s case if not in that of Sir Eustace.</p>
			<p>“Well, you can see the position then, so far as this other lady was concerned. Sir Eustace was getting his divorce, marriage with the negligible Miss Wildman was now out of the question, but marriage with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix, tortured in her conscience and seeing in divorce from her husband and marriage with Sir Eustace the only means of solving it⁠—marriage with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix, the real beloved, and even more eligible than Miss Wildman so far as the financial side was concerned, was to all appearances inevitable. I deprecate the use of hackneyed quotations as much as anybody, but really I feel that if I permit myself to add that hell has no fury like⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Can you prove all this, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick?” interposed Miss Dammers coolly on the hackneyed quotation.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick started. “I⁠—I think so,” he said, though a little dubiously.</p>
			<p>“I’m inclined to doubt it,” observed Miss Dammers briefly.</p>
			<p>Somewhat uncomfortable, under Miss Dammers’s sceptical eye, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick explained. “Well Sir Eustace, whose acquaintance I have been at some pains to cultivate recently⁠ ⁠…” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick shivered a little, as if the acquaintance had not been his ideal one. “Well, from a few indications that Sir Eustace has unconsciously given me⁠ ⁠… That is to say, I was questioning him at lunch today as adroitly as I could, my conviction as to the murderer’s identity having been formed at last, and he did unwittingly let fall a few trifles which⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I doubt it,” repeated Miss Dammers bluntly.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick looked quite nonplussed.</p>
			<p>Roger hurried to the rescue. “Well, shelving the matter of proof for the moment, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, and assuming that your reconstruction of the events is just an imaginative one. You’d reached the point where marriage between Sir Eustace and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix had become inevitable.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; oh, yes,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, with a grateful look towards his saviour. “And then of course, this lady formed her terrible decision and made her very clever plan. I think I’ve explained all that. Her old right of access to Sir Eustace’s rooms enabled her to type the letter on his typewriter one day when she knew he was out. She is quite a good mimic, and it was easy for her when ringing up <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix to imitate the sort of voice Miss Delorme might be expected to have.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, do any of us know this woman?” demanded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming abruptly.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick looked more embarrassed than ever. “Er⁠—yes,” he hesitated. “That is, you must remember it was she who smuggled Miss Dammers’s two books into Sir Eustace’s rooms too, you know.”</p>
			<p>“I shall have to be more careful about my friends in future, I see,” observed Miss Dammers, gently sarcastic.</p>
			<p>“An ex-mistress of Sir Eustace’s eh?” Roger murmured, conning over in his mind such names as he could remember from that lengthy list.</p>
			<p>“Well, yes,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick agreed. “But nobody had any idea of it. That is⁠—Dear me, this is very difficult.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick wiped his forehead with his handkerchief, and looked extremely unhappy.</p>
			<p>“She’d managed to conceal it?” Roger pressed him.</p>
			<p>“Er⁠—yes. She’d certainly managed to conceal the true state of matters between them, very cleverly indeed. I don’t think anybody suspected it at all.”</p>
			<p>“They apparently didn’t know each other?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming persisted. “They were never seen about together?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, at one time they were,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, looking in quite a hunted way from face to face. “Quite frequently. Then, I understand, they thought it better to pretend to have quarrelled and⁠—and met only in secret.”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t it time you told us this woman’s name, Chitterwick?” boomed Sir Charles down the table, looking judicial.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick scrambled desperately out of this fire of questions. “It’s very strange, you know, how murderers never will let well alone, isn’t it?” he said breathlessly. “It happens so often. I’m quite sure I should never have stumbled on the truth in this case if the murderess had only left things as they were, in accordance with her own admirable plot. But this trying to fix the guilt on another person⁠ ⁠… Really, from the intelligence displayed in this case, she ought to have been above that. Of course her plot <em>had</em> miscarried. Been only half-successful, I should say. But why not accept the partial failure? Why tempt Providence? Trouble was inevitable⁠—inevitable⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick seemed by this time utterly distressed. He was shuffling his notes with extreme nervousness, and wriggling in his chair. The glances he kept darting from face to face were almost pleading. But what he was pleading for remained obscure.</p>
			<p>“Dear me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, as if at his wits’ end. “This is very difficult. I’d better clear up the remaining point. It’s about the alibi.</p>
			<p>“In my opinion the alibi was an afterthought, owing to a piece of luck. Southampton Street is near both the Cecil and the Savoy, isn’t it? I happen to know that this lady has a friend, another woman, of a somewhat unconventional nature. She is continually away on exploring expeditions and so on, usually quite alone. She never stays in London more than a night or two, and I should imagine she is the sort of woman who rarely reads the newspapers. And if she did, I think she would certainly not divulge any suspicion they might convey to her, especially concerning a friend of her own.</p>
			<p>“I have ascertained that immediately preceding the crime this woman, whose name by the way is Jane Harding, stayed for two nights at the Savoy Hotel, and left London, on the morning the chocolates were delivered, for Africa. From there she was going on to South America. Where she may be now I have not the least idea. Nor, I should say, has anyone else. But she came to London from Paris, where she had been staying for a week.</p>
			<p>“The⁠—er⁠—criminal would know about this forthcoming trip to London, and so hurried to Paris. (I am afraid,” apologised <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick uneasily, “there is a good deal of guesswork here.) It would be simple to ask this other lady to post the parcel in London, as the parcel postage is so heavy from France, and just as simple to ensure it being delivered on the morning of the lunch-appointment with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix, by saying it was a birthday present, or some other pretext, and⁠—and⁠—must be posted to arrive on that particular day.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick wiped his forehead again and glanced pathetically at Roger. Roger could only stare back in bewilderment.</p>
			<p>“Dear me,” muttered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick distractedly, “this is <em>very</em> difficult.⁠—Well, I have satisfied myself that⁠—”</p>
			<p>Alicia Dammers had risen to her feet and was unhurriedly picking up her belongings. “I’m afraid,” she said, “I have an appointment. Will you excuse me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> President?”</p>
			<p>“Of course,” said Roger, in some surprise.</p>
			<p>At the door Miss Dammers turned back. “I’m so sorry not to be able to stay to hear the rest of your case, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick. But really, you know, as I said, I very much doubt whether you’ll be able to prove it.”</p>
			<p>She went out of the room.</p>
			<p>“She’s perfectly right,” whispered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, gazing after her in a petrified way. “I’m quite sure I can’t. But there isn’t the faintest doubt. I’m afraid, not the faintest.”</p>
			<p>Stupefaction reigned.</p>
			<p>“You⁠—you <em>can’t</em> mean⁠ ⁠… ?” twittered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming in a strangely shrill voice.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley was the first to get a grip on himself. “So we did have a practising criminologist amongst us after all,” he drawled, in a manner that was never Oxford. “How quite interesting.”</p>
			<p>Again silence held the Circle.</p>
			<p>“So now,” asked the President helplessly, “what the devil do we do?”</p>
			<p>Nobody enlightened him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
