<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
			<p>When the excitement that greeted this revolutionary reading of the case had died down, Roger went on to defend his theory in more detail.</p>
			<p>“It <em>is</em> something of a shock, of course, to find oneself contemplating Bendix as the very cunning murderer of his own wife, but really, once one has been able to rid one’s mind of all prejudice, I don’t see how the conclusion can possibly be avoided. Every item of evidence, however minute, goes to support it.”</p>
			<p>“But the motive!” ejaculated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming.</p>
			<p>“Motive? Good heavens, he’d motive enough. In the first place he was frankly⁠—no, not frankly; secretly!⁠—tired of her. Remember what we were told of his character. He’d sown his wild oats. But apparently he hadn’t finished sowing them, because his name has been mentioned in connection with more than one woman even since his marriage, usually, in the good old-fashioned way, actresses. So Bendix wasn’t such a solemn stick by any means. He liked his fun. And his wife, I should imagine, was just about the last person in the world to sympathise with such feelings.</p>
			<p>“Not that he hadn’t liked her well enough when he married her, quite possibly, though it was her money he was after all the time. But she must have bored him dreadfully very soon. And really,” said Roger impartially, “I think one can hardly blame him there. Any woman, however charming otherwise, is bound to bore a normal man if she does nothing but prate continually about honour and duty and playing the game; and that, I have on good authority, was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix’s habit.</p>
			<p>“Just look at the ménage in this new light. The wife would never overlook the smallest peccadillo. Every tiny lapse would be thrown up at him for years. Everything she did would be right and everything he did wrong. Her sanctimonious righteousness would be forever being contrasted with his vileness. She might even work herself into the state of those half-mad creatures who spend the whole of their married lives reviling their husbands for having been attracted by other women before they even met the girl it was their misfortune to marry. Don’t think I’m trying to blacken <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix. I’m just showing you how intolerable life with her might have been.</p>
			<p>“But that’s only the incidental motive. The real trouble was that she was too close with her money, and that too I know for a fact. That’s where she sentenced herself to death. He wanted it, or some of it, badly (it’s what he married her for), and she wouldn’t part.</p>
			<p>“One of the first things I did was to consult a Directory of Directors and make a list of the firms he’s interested in, with a view to getting a confidential report on their financial condition. The report reached me just before I left my rooms. It told me exactly what I expected⁠—that every single one of those firms is rocky, some only a little but some within sight of a crash. They all need money to save them. It’s obvious, isn’t it? He’s run through all his own money, and he had to get more. I found time to run down to Somerset House and again it was as I expected: her will was entirely in his favour. The really important point (which no one seems to have suspected) is that he isn’t a good business-man at all; he’s a rotten one. And half-a-million⁠ ⁠… Well!</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes. There’s motive enough.”</p>
			<p>“Motive allowed,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley. “And the nitrobenzene? You said, I think, that Bendix has some knowledge of chemistry.”</p>
			<p>Roger laughed. “You remind me of a Wagner opera, Bradley. The nitrobenzene motif crops up regularly from you whenever a possible criminal is mentioned. However, I think I can satisfy even you in this instance. Nitrobenzene as you know, is used in perfumery. In the list of Bendix’s businesses is the Anglo-Eastern Perfumery Company. I made a special, and dreadful, journey out to Acton for the express purpose of finding out whether the Anglo-Eastern Company used nitrobenzene at all, and, if so, whether its poisonous qualities were thoroughly recognised. The answer to both questions was in the affirmative. So there can be no doubt that Bendix is thoroughly acquainted with the stuff.</p>
			<p>“He might easily enough have got his supply from the factory, but I’m inclined to doubt that. I think he’d be cleverer than that. He probably made the stuff himself, if the process is as easy as Bradley told us. Because I happen to know that he was on the modern side at Selchester (that I heard quite by chance too), which presupposes at any rate an elementary knowledge of chemistry. Do you pass that, Bradley?”</p>
			<p>“Pass, friend nitrobenzene,” conceded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley.</p>
			<p>Roger drummed thoughtfully on the table with his finger-tips. “It was a well-planned affair, wasn’t it?” he meditated. “And so extremely easy to reconstruct. Bendix must have thought he’d provided against every possible contingency. And so he very nearly had. It was just that little bit of unlucky grit that gets into the smooth machinery of so many clever crimes: he didn’t know that his wife had seen the play before. He’d decided on the mild alibi of his presence at the theatre, you see, just in case suspicion should ever impossibly arise, and no doubt he stressed his desire to see the play and take her with him. Not to spoil his pleasure, she would have unselfishly concealed from him the fact that she had seen the play before and didn’t much want to see it again. That unselfishness let him down. Because it’s inconceivable that she would have turned it to her own advantage to win the bet he pretends to have made with her.</p>
			<p>“He left the theatre of course during the first interval, and hurried as far as he dare go in the ten minutes at his disposal, to post the parcel. I sat through the dreadful thing myself last night just to see when the intervals came. The first one fits excellently. I’d hoped he might have taken a taxi one way, as time was short, but if he did no driver of such taxis as did make a similar journey that evening can identify him. Or possibly the right driver hasn’t come forward yet. I got Scotland Yard to look into that point for me. But it really fits much better with the cleverness he’s shown all through, that he should have gone by ’bus or underground. Taxis, he’d know, are traceable. But if so he’d run it very fine indeed, and I shouldn’t be surprised if he got back to his box a few minutes late. The police may be able to establish that.”</p>
			<p>“It seems to me,” observed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley, “that we made something of a mistake in turning the man down from membership here. We thought his criminology wasn’t up to standard, didn’t we? Well, well.”</p>
			<p>“But we could hardly be expected to know that he was a practical criminologist rather than a mere theoretical one,” Roger smiled. “It was a mistake, though. It would have been pleasant to include a practical criminologist among our members.”</p>
			<p>“I must confess that I thought at one time that we did,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming, making her peace. “Sir Charles,” she added unnecessarily, “I apologise, without reserve.”</p>
			<p>Sir Charles inclined his head courteously. “Please don’t refer to it, madam. And in any event the experience for me was an interesting one.”</p>
			<p>“I may have been misled by the case I quoted,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming, rather wistfully. “It was a strangely close parallel.”</p>
			<p>“It was the first parallel that occurred to me, too,” Roger agreed. “I studied the Molineux case quite closely, hoping to get a pointer from it. But now, if I were asked for a parallel, I should reply with the Carlyle Harris case. You remember, the young medical student who sent a pill containing morphine to the girl Helen Potts, to whom it turned out that he had been secretly married for a year. He was by way of being a profligate and a general young rotter too. A great novel, as you know, has been founded on the case, so why not a great crime too?”</p>
			<p>“Then why, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham,” Miss Dammers wanted to know, “do you think that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix took the risk of not destroying the forged letter and the wrapper when he had the chance?”</p>
			<p>“He very carefully didn’t do so,” Roger replied promptly, “because the forged letter and the wrapper had been calculated not only to divert suspicion from himself but actually to point away from him to somebody else⁠—an employee of Mason’s, for instance, or an anonymous lunatic. Which is exactly what they did.”</p>
			<p>“But wouldn’t it be a great risk, to send poisoned chocolates like that to Sir Eustace?” suggested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick diffidently. “I mean, Sir Eustace might have been ill the next morning, or not offered to hand them over at all. Suppose he had given them to somebody else instead of Bendix.”</p>
			<p>Roger proceeded to give <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick cause for his diffidence. He was feeling something of a personal pride in Bendix by this time, and it distressed him to hear a great man thus maligned.</p>
			<p>“Oh, really! You must give my man credit for being what he is. He’s not a bungler, you know. It wouldn’t have had any serious results if Sir Eustace had been ill that morning, or eaten the chocolates himself, or if they’d been stolen in transit and consumed by the postman’s favourite daughter, or any other unlikely contingency. Come, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick! You don’t imagine he’d send the poisoned ones through the post, do you? Of course not. He’d send harmless ones, and exchange them for the others on the way home. Dash it all, he wouldn’t go out of his way to present opportunities to chance.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! I see,” murmured <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick, properly subdued.</p>
			<p>“We’re dealing with a very great criminal,” went on Roger, rather less severely. “That can be seen at every point. Take the arrival at the club, just for example⁠—that most unusual early arrival (why this early arrival at all, by the way, if he isn’t guilty?). Well, he doesn’t wait outside and follow his unconscious accomplice in, you see. Not a bit of it. Sir Eustace is chosen because he’s known to get there so punctually at half-past ten every morning; takes a pride in it; boasts of it; goes out of his way to keep up the good old custom. So Bendix arrives at ten thirty-five, and there things are. It had puzzled me at the beginning of the case, by the way, to see why the chocolates had been sent to Sir Eustace at his club at all, instead of to his rooms. Now it’s obvious.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I wasn’t so far out with my list of conditions,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley consoled himself. “But why don’t you agree with my rather subtle point about the murderer not being a public-school or University man, Sheringham? Just because Bendix happens to have been at Selchester and Oxford?”</p>
			<p>“No, because I’d make the still more subtle point that where the code of a public-school and University might influence a murderer in the way he murdered another man, it wouldn’t have much effect when a woman is to be the victim. I agree that if Bendix had been wanting to dispose of Sir Eustace, he would probably have put him out of the world in a nice, straightforward, manly way. But one doesn’t use nice, straightforward, manly ways in one’s dealings with women, if it comes to hitting them on the head with a bludgeon or anything in that nature. Poison, I fancy, would be quite in order. And there’s very little suffering with a large dose of nitrobenzene. Unconsciousness soon intervenes.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” admitted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley, “that is rather too subtle a point for one of my unpsychological attributes.”</p>
			<p>“I think I dealt with most of your other conditions. As regards the methodical habits, which you deduced from the meticulous doses of poison in each chocolate, my point of course is that the doses were exactly equal in order that Bendix could take any two of the chocolates and be sure of having got the right amount of nitrobenzene into his system to produce the symptoms he wanted, and not enough to run any serious risk. That dosing of himself with the poison really was a master-stroke. And it’s so natural that a man shouldn’t have taken so many chocolates as a woman. He exaggerated his symptoms considerably, no doubt, but the effect on everybody was tremendous.</p>
			<p>“We must remember, you see, that we’ve only got his word for the conversation in the drawing-room, over the eating of the chocolates, just as we’ve only got his word for it that there ever was a bet at all. Most of that conversation certainly took place, however. Bendix is far too great an artist not to make all possible use of the truth in his lying. But of course he wouldn’t have left her that afternoon till he’d seen her take, or somehow made her take, at least six of the chocolates, which he’d know made up more than a lethal dose. That was another advantage in having the stuff in those exact six-minim quantities.”</p>
			<p>“In fact,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley summed up, “our Uncle Bendix is a great man.”</p>
			<p>“He really is,” said Roger, quite solemnly.</p>
			<p>“You’ve no doubt at all that he is the criminal?” queried Miss Dammers.</p>
			<p>“None at all,” said Roger, astonished.</p>
			<p>“Um,” said Miss Dammers.</p>
			<p>“Why, have you?”</p>
			<p>“Um,” said Miss Dammers.</p>
			<p>The conversation then lapsed.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley, “let’s all tell Sheringham how wrong he is, shall we?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming looked tense. “I’m afraid,” she said in a hushed voice, “that he is only too right.”</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley refused to be impressed. “Oh, I think I can find a hole or two to pick at. You seem to attach a good deal of importance to the motive, Sheringham. Don’t you exaggerate? One doesn’t poison a wife one’s tired of; one leaves her. And really, I find some difficulty in believing (a) that Bendix should have been so set on getting hold of more money to pour down the drainpipe of his businesses as to commit murder for it, and (b) that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix should have been so close as to refuse to come to her husband’s help if he really was badly pressed.”</p>
			<p>“Then I think you fail to estimate the characters of both of them,” Roger told him. “They were both obstinate as the devil. It was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix, not her husband, who realised that his businesses <em>were</em> a drainpipe. I could give you a list a yard long of murders that have been committed with far less motive than Bendix had.”</p>
			<p>“Motive allowed again, then. Now you remember that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bendix had had a lunch appointment for the day of her death, which was cancelled. Didn’t Bendix know of that? Because if he did, would he have chosen a day for the delivery of the chocolates when he knew his wife wouldn’t be at home for lunch to receive them?”</p>
			<p>“Just the point I had thought of putting to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham myself,” remarked Miss Dammers.</p>
			<p>Roger looked puzzled. “It seems to me a most unimportant point. If it comes to that, why should he necessarily want to give the chocolates to his wife at lunch-time?”</p>
			<p>“For two reasons,” responded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley glibly.</p>
			<p>“Firstly because he would naturally want to put them to their right purpose as soon as he possibly could, and secondly because his wife being the only person who can contradict his story of the bet, he would obviously want her silenced as soon as practicable.”</p>
			<p>“You’re quibbling,” Roger smiled, “and I refuse to be drawn. For that matter, I don’t see why Bendix should have known of his wife’s lunch-appointment at all. They were constantly lunching out, both of them, and I don’t suppose they took any particular care to inform each other beforehand.”</p>
			<p>“Humph!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley, and stroked his chin.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick ventured to raise his recently crushed head. “You really base your whole case on the bet, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham, don’t you?”</p>
			<p>“And the psychological deduction I drew from the story of it. Yes, I do. Entirely.”</p>
			<p>“So that if the bet could be proved after all to have been made, you would have no case left?”</p>
			<p>“Why,” exclaimed Roger, in some alarm, “have you any independent evidence that the bet was made?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no. Oh, dear me, no. Nothing of the sort. I was merely thinking that if any one did want to disprove your case, as Bradley suggested, it is the bet on which he would have to concentrate.”</p>
			<p>“You mean, quibbling about the motive, and the lunch-appointment, and such minor matters, is altogether beside the point?” suggested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley amiably. “Oh, I quite agree. But I was only trying to test his case, you know, not disprove it. And for why? Because I think it’s the right one. The Mystery of the Poisoned Chocolates, so far as I’m concerned, is at an end.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, Bradley,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham.</p>
			<p>“So three cheers for our sleuth-like President,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley with great heartiness, “coupled with the name of Graham Reynard Bendix for the fine run he’s given us. Hip, hip⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And you say you’ve definitely proved the purchase of the typewriter, and the contact of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix with the sample-book at Webster’s, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham?” remarked Alicia Dammers, who had apparently been pursuing a train of thought of her own.</p>
			<p>“I do, Miss Dammers,” said Roger, not without complacence.</p>
			<p>“Would you give me the name of the typewriter-shop?”</p>
			<p>“Of course,” Roger tore a page from his notebook and copied out the name and address.</p>
			<p>“Thank you. And can you give me a description of the girl at Webster’s who identified the photograph of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bendix?”</p>
			<p>Roger looked at her a little uneasily; she gazed back with her usual calm serenity. Roger’s uneasiness grew. He gave her as good a description of Webster’s young woman as he could recall. Miss Dammers thanked him imperturbably.</p>
			<p>“Well, what are we going to do about it all?” persisted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley, who seemed to have adopted the rôle of showman for his President. “Shall we send a delegation to Scotland Yard consisting of Sheringham and myself, to break the news to them that their troubles are over?”</p>
			<p>“You are assuming that everybody agrees with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham?”</p>
			<p>“Of course.”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t it customary to put this sort of question to a vote?” suggested Miss Dammers coolly.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Carried unanimously,’ ” quoted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley. “Yes, do let’s have the correct procedure. Well, then, Sheringham moves that this meeting do accept his solution of the Poisoned Chocolates Mystery as the right one, and send a delegation of himself and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley to Scotland Yard to talk pretty severely to the police. I second the motion. Those in favour⁠ ⁠… ? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fielder-Flemming endeavoured to conceal her disapproval of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley in her approval of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley’s suggestion. “I certainly think that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham has proved his case,” she said stiffly.</p>
			<p>“Sir Charles?”</p>
			<p>“I agree,” said Sir Charles, in stern tones, equally disproving <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley’s frivolity.</p>
			<p>“Chitterwick?”</p>
			<p>“I agree too.” Was it Roger’s fancy, or did <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chitterwick hesitate just a moment before he spoke, as if troubled by some mental reservation which he did not care to put into words? Roger decided that it was his fancy.</p>
			<p>“And Miss Dammers?” concluded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley.</p>
			<p>Miss Dammers looked calmly round the table. “I don’t agree at all. I think <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham’s exposition was exceedingly ingenious, and altogether worthy of his reputation; at the same time I think it quite wrong. To-morrow I hope to be able to prove to you who really committed this crime.”</p>
			<p>The Circle gaped at her respectfully.</p>
			<p>Roger, wondering whether his ears had not really been playing tricks with him, found that his tongue too utterly refused to work. An inarticulate sound oozed from him.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bradley was the first to recover himself. “Carried, non-unanimously. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> President, I think this is a precedent. Does anybody know what happens when a resolution is not carried unanimously?”</p>
			<p>In the temporary disability of the President, Miss Dammers took it upon herself to decide. “The meeting stands adjourned, I think,” she said.</p>
			<p>And adjourned the meeting found itself.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
